---
layout: post
title: "A deep dive into running LLMs locally"
date: 2026-06-05
categories: [agenticcoding]
---

Hello, welcome to my blog. For around 3 weeks now, I have been getting into agentic coding and running a local LLM. The most frustrating part of the experience was how hard it is to find information when troubleshooting issues. That's why I'm writing this as a short beginner guide and to write my findings.

## Context

I have long been sceptical about agentic coding. I thought LLMs would forever be too expensive to handle the high amount of large input and output messages that are required for doing agentic programming. After seeing more and more job descriptions asking for agentic coding experience though, I decided to finally give it a try. However I still didn't want to spend money on a cloud LLM subscription, that's why I tried local models first. As a nice bonus, it would also give me a much better idea about how expensive it really is to run a model doing agentic programming. 
I'm not going to go deep into agentic coding tools (I will call those 'harness' from now on), that's for a future article. 

While debugging issues I mostly asked cloud LLMs for help but I found that due to local LLMs still being quite niche, they often couldn't give good advice about it. If you do experience issues, I recommend asking Claude though, while still lacking, its knowledge about running local LLMs was still a lot better than ChatGPT and Gemini.

## Hardware

The optimal way to run a local model heavily depends on your specific hardware. That's why I mention my current specs here:
  - GPU: AMD RX 7800 XT **(16 GB VRAM)**
  - System RAM: **48 GB**
  - CPU: AMD Ryzen 7 5700X3D
  - Windows 10

Everything together is not even 1500 € and yet I have managed to get some impressive performance out of it. I'm on windows 10 so all the CLI commands in this article are for powershell.

## Beginner mode: Ollama

Ollama is a great place to start as a beginner. It only took me around 10 minutes to install it and get it running (not including the time to download the model). It's a simple desktop application with a chat interface and it also automatically installs a web server that your agent can use.

It only took these simple steps to install and start agentic coding:
- Run the install command [Download page](https://ollama.com/download)
- Open the desktop app
- Open a chat and click the model dropdown, click Qwen3.6. The model will now be downloaded.
- Go to your harness and configure it to use your local model (set URL, etc). For example, OpenCode config would look like this:
  - Add a Custom provider
  - Provider ID: fill in anything
  - Display name: fill in anything
  - Base URL: http://localhost:11434
  - API key: empty
  - Click submit

Once the download is finished you should now be able to chat with the model and do agentic coding.

Now, with Ollama I quickly ran against several annoyances. It's hard to configure it more deeply, hard to choose other models, performance in general is low. 
I was happy with the code it was outputting however, which made me excited to further explore how I could run a local model with much better performance.

## Model: Qwen3.6

Before I get into the 'expert' way of running a local LLM. I will first explain more about the Qwen 3.6 model. In this article I will mostly focus on model Qwen3.6: 35B-A3B and 27B. Those are currently considered to be the most capable local coding LLMs, that are still small enough to run on cheap hardware like mine. It came out around 2 months ago.

### Qwen3.6-27B, a dense model

Dense models are easier to explain so I explain this one first. A dense model simply activates all of its parameters, 27B for this model, to generate a single token. In general this makes them slightly more capable than mixture of experts (MoE) models. However, since they activate all tokens, they require a lot more memory bandwidth, and as such they only run with good performance if you have enough video memory (VRAM) to store the whole model. They also are easier to train than MoE but that's not something we have to consider.

### Qwen3.6-35B-A3B, a mixture of experts model

35B-A3B is a so called mixture of experts (MoE) model. An MoE distincts itself from a dense model in that it only activates a part of its parameters to generate a single token. That's indicated by its name. 35B is the total number of parameters, 3B is the number of parameters activated to generate a single token. They are slightly less capable but they require way less bandwidth, making them more suitable to run on CPU. Since my GPU only has 16 GB VRAM, running the dense model requires some big compromises (more on that later). That's why I will mostly focus on this MoE model, because it can run with great performance, partially running on the GPU and partially running on the CPU.

## Expert mode: llama.cpp

Here I will explain a second way to run a model locally: llama.cpp. While Ollama only took me 10 minutes to get up and running, llama.cpp is a very deep rabbit hole and it took me several days to get it to run a model better than Ollama. With my current setup though, its agentic programming is around 5-10 times faster than my first Ollama setup, so it's definitely worth it to explore it further.

Don't get confused by the name, it's not a cpp file, it's a full program. However it's named like that because a lot of people compile it themselves.
That leads me to my first recommendation here: don't bother trying to compile it yourself unless you know very well what you are doing (why are you reading this post then). For AMD GPUs, just get the vulkan pre-build binaries. If you are not an experienced C++ dev, I honestly don't see why you would want to install 10 GB of build tools/SDKs taking up precious C:/ drive space, and probably deal with lots of compilation problems. 

Installing llama.cpp is easy, just download the binaries from their [github](https://github.com/ggml-org/llama.cpp). Unzip.

Permanently set following env var if you want to store the models on a drive other than C:  
setx LLAMA_CACHE "G:\llamacache\llama-cache"

Now the hard part starts. There are hundreds of startup parameters for llama.cpp. You want to run a model with parameters where it is still smart enough for agentic coding, but you also want to optimise prompt processing tokens/s (PP) and token generation tokens/s (TG)
This is the final command I landed on, and I will later explain every part of it, step by step:

<div class="cli-block">
  <div class="cli-header">
    <div class="cli-title">PowerShell</div>
    <div class="cli-controls">
      <span></span>
      <span></span>
      <span></span>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="cli-body">
    <code>PS C:\> .\llama-server -hf byteshape/Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-GGUF:Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-IQ4_XS-4.15bpw -c 65536 --mmproj-auto --no-mmproj-offload --temp 0.6 --top-k 20 --top-p 0.95 --min-p 0 --presence-penalty 0 --repeat-penalty 1 --parallel 1 --no-mmap --api-key anything --no-context-shift -ctk q8_0 -ctv q5_1 --flash-attn on -b 1024 -ub 1024 --n-cpu-moe 17</code>
  </div>
</div>

Now here the usefulness of my advice will depend a lot on what hardware you are running in your PC. If it's very similar (AMD GPU with 16GB RAM), then you can probably use most of the same parameters.

### llama-server

The llama.cpp binaries come with a llama-server executable. This runs the model with a webserver, with a web ui included.

### -hf byteshape/Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-GGUF:Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-IQ4_XS-4.15bpw

HF stands for Huggingface. [Huggingface](https://huggingface.co/) is the biggest platform hosting models. With the -hf command, llama-server will automatically download the model following -hf. Now for the model itself, you can't run a base model directly in llama-server, the model needs to be in GGUF format. Also, you should run a quantized model. IQ4_XS-4.15bpw from byteshape is the specific quantization that I'm running. More about quantization later. The file/model size is 17.5 GB.

### -c 65536

This parameter configures the maximum size of the context window. Total number of tokens the model can handle at once. Higher context uses more memory and is slower, lower context is more limiting. Pretty self explanatory once you get more experienced with agentic coding, so I don't explain it much further here.

### --mmproj-auto --no-mmproj-offload

mmproj is the vision encoder, it transforms an image and outputs it in tokens that the LLM can understand. The first command here makes sure that the mmproj included with the model is used instead of the default llama-cpp encoder. The second command is to store the encoder into system RAM. This is because I only rarely use vision, so I don't want to waste precious VRAM to store mmproj. I have more than enough system RAM though so I always keep it loaded. If you don't want to use vision you can only set the --no-mmproj parameter. If you want to use vision a lot, then exclude the --no-mmproj-offload parameter.

### Token generation parameters

--temp 0.6 --top-k 20 --top-p 0.95 --min-p 0 --presence-penalty 0 --repeat-penalty 1

These parameters are all related with how tokens are generated and selected. I don't know the deep details for this so I will only give a surface explanation for each of them.
- Temp: temperature, how random the model behaves. 0 is deterministic. 1 is default. For coding with Qwen, 0.6 is recommended. You can lower it if the model often generates bad syntax, json formatting, etc. Increase it if the model gets stuck and struggles to find alternative solutions to its problem. I personally never change it.
- Top-k: the model will only consider the top 20 possible tokens generated. This is a low value, more suited for coding. Because you don't want the model to choose an outlier for example a quote instead of a curly bracket when it's writing code.
- top-p, min-p: similar purpose as top-k, i don't know the details
- presence-penalty: higher values discourages the model from generating a token it already generated before. Set to 0 to disable it because code contains a lot of repeated characters.
- repeat-penalty: discourages the model from repeating the same token is generated very recently. Set to 1 to disable, again same reason.

### --parallel 1

Setting to higher values allows the model to process multiple requests at once. Higher values use more VRAM though, and because I have too little VRAM already, I simply keep at 1. Sub-agents run synchronously but I don't mind this downside.

### --no-mmap

This keeps the whole model in RAM/VRAM all the time. Disabling it will allow the model to be dynamically loaded. My 48 GB RAM is more than enough so this is a free speed boost, it only slows down initial startup a little bit because it immediately loads the whole model at start-up. Remove this parameter if short on RAM.

### --api-key anything 

I had more issues with an empty api key. Self explanatory beyond that.

### --no-context-shift

With this parameter, when a client tries to request with a context bigger than the configured max context, the server will refuse and send an error back. When this parameter is not set, the start of the context will be truncated. Very important to set for agentic coding, the start of your context window probably will contain your harness system prompt, AGENTS.md and your prompt, you really don't want this truncated from the context. Instead, this will cause the agent to compact its context, (hopefully) only keeping the important stuff in the context.

### -ctk q8_0 -ctv q5_1

These parameters are for quantizing the KV cache. In short: set to F16 maximum, Q4_0 minimum, Q5_1 is nice middle ground. Higher values use more VRAM, multiplied with the max context size. Model will make more mistakes and act more dumbly with lower values. K is more important than V. More details in the Quantization chapter.

### --flash-attn on -b 1024 -ub 1024

These parameters improve prompt processing speed (PP). PP is very important for agentic coding, because the agent is often reading large code files. Also when doing large tasks, it will often have to compact context. Often when compacting, the prompt cache fails, causing it to re-process its whole (full) context. High PP makes this a lot less time lost.

flash-attn, flash attention, is basically a free speed boost if your hardware supports it. B and UB set the batch size. Larger batch sizes uses more VRAM, however the increased PP is worth it. Also because we are using parallel=1, we set b and ub the same. I think it should be: b = parallel * ub.

### --n-cpu-moe 17

Last but not least. This parameter is the most important parameter to tweak, when running a model hybrid on CPU and GPU. Not all layers in an MoE are equally important. Attention layers run for every token, while expert layers only activate for some tokens. The layers that are active with every token should be in VRAM, the remaining experts for which there is no space can live in system RAM. 

--n-cpu-moe N will put the first N expert layers in CPU, all other layers will be (attempted) to be fit in VRAM. If you set this value too high then a lot of your VRAM will be free, but then you are leaving free TG performance on the table. If you set this value too low then fitting the other layers in GPU will fail, causing them to be fit in system RAM, which will drastically reduce PP. Usually my PP is 10 times smaller when this happens. 

## Quantization

Nearly every model that people commonly run locally is quantized. The tensors in a base model are usually in BF16 format. Several third parties take those base models, turn them into GGUF format and they also offer various quantization levels. Quantization is the act of lowering most tensors in the model from BF16 to a smaller precision. BF16 is Google's 16-bit floating point format. q8_0 is an 8-bit integer format. Since q8 uses half the bits, the model uses around half the memory while the loss of quality is almost negligible. As you go down to lower bit lengths the quality does become significantly less, especially once you go below 4. The IQ4_XS-4.15bpw model mentioned earlier uses 4.15 bits on average per parameter, hence its name. [Here](https://huggingface.co/byteshape/Qwen3.6-35B-A3B-GGUF) is the huggingface page of this specific quantization where you can find all its details. If you click on a specific quantization on the right, you can find the command to run that exact model in llama-server or many other tools, very handy.

### KV cache quantization

KV cache is also something that can be quantized and this is still the most unclear area for me about what exactly the trade-offs are here. I generally stick to -ctk q8_0 -ctv q5_1, which is also what this [article](https://anbeeld.com/articles/kv-cache-quantization-benchmarks-for-long-context) recommends. Some people claim anything below the default F16 is terrible. Other say they have no issues using q4_0 for both K and V. If you have tool calls often failing, then it's probably better to increase it but it will cost more memory. People also say that lower bit quantization hurts more as context gets bigger, because KV mostly affects attention, so as context grows the AI gets more and more lost. But then running both bigger context and higher KV quants multiplicatively uses more memory so it's a big tradeoff.

## Performance

With the above mentioned setup, I'm running the 35B-A3B model averaging around 1200 PP tps and 33 TG tps. Also the model is intelligent enough to make useful code changes. It almost never gets stuck in loops. Toolcalls rarely fail. It doesn't get stuck often, and when it did, it's often when I told it to do something that was near impossible due to me misunderstanding something, causing me to give it bad instructions.

### 27B

Now for the dense 27B model. Reading around on r/localllama, it seems generally considered to be slightly better at coding than 35B-A3B. However, with higher bit quantization I can't run it completely in GPU and then I only have 3 tps TG. 
Lowering a lot of settings and quantization, it does fit within VRAM with following command:

<div class="cli-block">
  <div class="cli-header">
    <div class="cli-title">PowerShell</div>
    <div class="cli-controls">
      <span></span>
      <span></span>
      <span></span>
    </div>
  </div>
  <div class="cli-body">
    <code>PS C:\> .\llama-server -hf mradermacher/Qwen3.6-27B-i1-GGUF:IQ3_XS -c 32768 --mmproj-auto --no-mmproj-offload --temp 0.6 --top-k 20 --top-p 0.95 --min-p 0 --presence-penalty 0 --repeat-penalty 1 --parallel 1 --no-mmap --api-key anything --no-context-shift -ctk q5_0 -ctv q4_1 --flash-attn on -b 256 -ub 256</code>
  </div>
</div>

However 32k context is pretty much the absolute minimum to be useful for agentic coding. Any slightly larger task will constantly have to compact to stay within the context window. Its speed is ok, and it makes less errors than I expected from a 3bit quant. Still, it seems inferior with my specific hardware.

## Conclusion

It is definitely possible to do agentic coding with a local model, even on relatively cheap hardware. Ollama is a great entrypoint, just to try it out. llama.cpp is the other end of the spectrum, getting started with it takes quite a significant amount of time but if you configure it well, it can give you very good performance. A nice middleground between those two might be [LM Studio](https://lmstudio.ai/), it runs on top of llama.cpp, but I haven't tried it out. [vLLM](https://vllm.ai/) is another option, it seems to be mostly suitable for an on-premise server.

I have a next post planned where I go deeper into agentic coding harnesses. There I will further elaborate on my experiences using tools like OpenCode, Pi and Cline (I don't recommend Cline) and agentic coding in general. 

Thanks for reading!

### AI disclosure

- All the content in this blog post was hand written.
- A spelling check was done by Gemma 4*, small changes were made based on its feedback. [GitHub commit](https://github.com/Vincentp90/Vincentp90.github.io/commit/75d8adfde37dae9226196379c30d4dd5f273b0c6)
- This website and blog layout and styling was mostly vibecoded with the Qwen3.6 model discussed above.

\* unsloth/gemma-4-26B-A4B-it-GGUF:UD-Q4_K_XL, Gemma 4 is considered the best general purpose local model, but worse at coding than Qwen3.6